---
layout: post
title:  "Is the bikeshed safe from radiation poisoning?"
date: 2022-01-22
category: Productivity
published: true
---

<div class="post-categories">
  {% if post %}
    {% assign categories = post.categories %}
  {% else %}
    {% assign categories = page.categories %}
  {% endif %}
  Category: <a href="{{site.baseurl}}/categories/#{{category|slugize}}">{{category}}</a>
  &nbsp;
</div>

Imagine you are in a one-hour board meeting for the launch of a nuclear power station. The chief scientist begins with a presentation on the high-level safety procedures and precautions; waste management, evacuation protocols and all those mission-critical components that mean success or failure, and life or death. 

Important stuff, but can be a bit of a snoozefest. The scientist knows this and keeps it succinct - she finishes her presentation in 13 minutes. In the Q&A that follows, only a couple of people ask some relatively basic sanity-checking questions. The scientist reassures them and scans the room waiting for any others. After just the right amount of awkward silence, she yields with 45 minutes left in the meeting.

Next up is the facilities manager. The plant wants to market itself as climate-friendly so he proposes building a bike shed to encourage employees to cycle to work. The room starts buzzing with discussion on materials, layout, security, cost, aesthetics and anything else that comes to mind. The meeting runs to the end of the hour, with follow-ups added to the agenda for the next meeting. The board members stand and leave, satisfied with the meeting and their contribution.

### So what's the problem?

The problem is that the board spent most of the available time and energy on the bike shed - a minor but easy-to-grasp proposal - rather than the safety precautions of the plant that could save lives and the business.

This demonstrates the **Law of Triviality**, aka Bikeshedding:

> Time and energy are disproportionately allocated towards relatively trivial matters at the expense of more important issues.

Think about it - does this happen in your workplace?

The scenario above is inspired by the example given in the book where this effect is originally proposed; [Parkinson's Law and Other Studies in Administration, 1957][parkinsons-law-book]. It is also rife in technology, as suggested by [software developer Poul-Henning Kamp in 1999][kamp-article]:

>"...just because you are capable of building a bikeshed does not mean you should stop others from building one just because you do not like the color they plan to paint it. This is a metaphor indicating that you need not argue about every little feature just because you know enough to do so. Some people have commented that the amount of noise generated by a change is inversely proportional to the complexity of the change."

An even more insidious effect is that trivial conversations can lead people to get ever more opinionated. This shifts the focus entirely away from the more important matters - you may notice this happen often in politics.

### Why does this happen?

Important problems tend to be complex:
- More factors to consider and trade-off
- Require technical or subject-matter expertise
- May take hours or days of thinking, planning and designing alone or in small groups
- Higher cognitive overhead - tiring to think about
- Often tedious and unsexy

Bikeshedding happens even more in software engineering because of:
- Myriad ways to solve any one problem
- Differing opinions and experiences combined with egos
- Isolation from or lack of empathy with the client

Rarely are the discussions between engineers on something specific to their trade going to have a direct impact to the client or stakeholder. This is especially true in sectors where technology is an enabler but not the final product, e.g. finance, healthcare and energy.

Stakeholders rarely want to know the details, just the headline and how it affects them. However, **people want to contribute and have their voices heard**. I have personally seen bikeshedding happen most often in a few cases:
1. **Isolated teams** - these can create echo chambers where small issues get magnified and perspective is lost.
2. **Committees** - if there is no clear authority or method (e.g. voting) to make final decisions, then discussions will drag on endlessly.
3. **Micromanagers** - they feel the need to provide opinions, ideas and feedback often on insignificant details.
4. **Opinionated engineers** - they often have good intentions when sharing knowledge, but it can sometimes mean more time is spent deciding how to correctly log errors than on preventing and handling those errors in the first place.

### How to avoid Bikeshedding

Each case will be different, but there are a few things you can do to detect and reduce Bikeshedding in your team and organisation.

- **Remember the mission.** Always keep the organisation's big picture in mind. If you are providing feedback, make sure you understand the problem well enough to help progress towards the ultimate goal, not your personal ones.

- **Prioritise often and mercilessly.** This laser-focus on what is most important will reduce the frequency and length of tangential discussions.

- **Separate time for productivity and creativity.** You don't want people only hyper-focused on the prioritised problems all the time. Tangential discussions can stoke creative ideas that could be incredibly valuable to the future of the firm, so dedicate some time to that. When random ideas come up during get-shit-done time, they are easier to park knowing that there will be time for them later.

- **Empower individuals with full authority to make decisions.** Invite opinions and feedback regularly on specific aspects where the main authority needs more input. In this way, explicit ownership over projects alone can hugely improve quality and delivery without diminishing the positive effects of teamwork.

- **Keep meeting agendas tight.** Each item should have an expected amount of time to limit the effects of Parkinson's law. Ensure the moderator has the authority to keep conversations on topic by cutting diversions short and penciling them down for another meeting. At the end of the agenda, give people time back in their day - they will love you for it.



[parkinsons-law-book]: https://www.amazon.com/Parkinsons-Law-Other-Studies-Administration/dp/0395080681/ref=pd_sbs_1/143-5802041-2046740
[kamp-article]: https://bikeshed.com/